FIX the tests for convergence to the minimum norm solution of unpenalized ridge / OLS (#25948)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/linear_model.rst

Ordinary Least Squares
=======================

:class:`LinearRegression` fits a linear model with coefficients :math:`w =
(w_1, ..., w_p)` to minimize the residual sum of squares between the observed
targets in the dataset, and the targets predicted by the linear approximation.
Mathematically it solves a problem of the form:

> .. math:: \min_{w, w_0} || X w + w_0 - y||_2^2

Reviewer: We should make it then consistent throughout this document.

Author: I agree. Do we introduce the `1_s` vector everywhere for consistency?

Reviewer: I would not do it because it is harder to read and most people, I guess, will understand without it.

Reviewer: It could be used in a "mathematical details" section.

.. math::

>    \min_{w} || X w + w_0 1_s - y||_2^2 + \alpha ||w||_2^2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   \min_{w} || X w + w_0 - y||_2^2 + \alpha ||w||_2^2
```
The OLS equation above just uses $|| X w + w_0 - y||_2^2$. Why should we start here with introducing $1_s$?

Author: To make the shapes of all terms consistent (since w_0 is a scalar). I think I multiply terms by `1_s` somewhere in the derivation later to get some terms to simplify.

    >>> reg.fit([[0, 0], [0, 0], [1, 1]], [0, .1, 1])
    Ridge(alpha=0.5)
    >>> reg.coef_

>     array([0.34545..., 0.34545...])

Author: Note: this was not actually needed to make the docstest pass: this PR does not change the Ridge implementation. But I think it makes the docstring more readable and consistent with the number of digits we display for the intercept.

Let's define the scalar :math:`\bar{r} = \bar{X}^{T} w  + w_0  - \bar{y}`. We
can now expand:

.. math::  ||X w + w_0 1_s - y||_2^2 = ||X_c w - y_c ||_2^2 + ||\bar{r} 1_s ||_2^2 + 2 \bar{r} 1_s^{T} (X_c w - y_c)

If :math:`n` is the number of samples, we have:

.. math::  ||X w + w_0 1_s - y||_2^2 = ||X_c w - y_c ||_2^2 + \bar{r}^2 n + 2 \bar{r} (1_s^{T} X_c w - 1_s^{T} y_c)

Since :math:`X_c` and :math:`y_c` are the centered versions of X and y, we have
:math:`1_s^{T} X_c = 0` and :math:`1_s^{T} y_c = 0`. Therefore:

.. math::  ||X w + w_0 1_s - y||_2^2 + \alpha ||w||_2^2 = ||X_c w - y_c ||_2^2  + \alpha ||w||_2^2 + \bar{r}^2 n

The first two terms of the right hand side do not depend on :math:`w_0` and are
minimized by :math:`\hat{w}` the solution of the centered ridge without
intercept. The third term is positive and therefore subsequently minimized to
zero by setting :math:`\hat{w_0} = \bar{y} - \bar{X}^{T} \hat{w}`.

Note that the same argument holds for the OLS estimator (for the specific case
where :math:`\alpha = 0`) or for any other penalized linear regression
estimator.

Furthermore least-norm solution for the centered OLS problem without intercept

> is also the least-norm solution for non-centered OLS problem with intercept

Author: This is actually not that obvious in retrospect. When `X.T @ X` is singular, the OLS problem needs to be written as the constrained minimization problem `argmin_{w, w_0} ||w|| st. X w + w_0 = y` in order to admit a unique solution. To show the equivalence with the minimum norm solution to `X_c w = y_c` we would first need to show that for any solutions (w^*, w_0^*) to the `X w + w_0 = y`  problem then `w^*` is also a solutions to `X_c w = y_c`.

Author: Or maybe we could prove the equivalence by continuity by taking the limit of the 2 ridge solutions when alpha tends towards 0?

Author: Actually I know how to cover the OLS cased. I will later push a commit to properly cover this case.

Reviewer 2: OK, do ping me when you think this can be reviewed. :+1:

Author: I pushed a new commit to extend the doc to that case. The HTML rendering should soon be ready.

    .. [4] Tristan Fletcher: `Relevance Vector Machines Explained <https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/doc_view/pid/3dc9d625404fdfef6eaccc3babddefe4c176abd4>`_

.. _linear_regression_intercept:

Note on the handling of the intercept in linear regression models
=================================================================

All least-squares linear regression estimators in scikit-learn solve a centered
version of the problem without intercept and then compute the intercept a
posteriori from that solution.

This ensures that the ridge solution converges to the minimal norm OLS solution
when `alpha` tends to zero in the underdeterimined case (more features than

> samples).

Reviewer: Could you elaborate on this? Do we have a problem when we include the intercept in the norm? Does Ridge then no more converge to the same solution?

Author: I believe so because we do not penalize the intercept parameter in the ridge objective and the ridge solutions should be a continuous function of alpha. But I do that have a formal proof beyond this intuition. I plan to do some experiments and maybe a new test.

Reviewer: It seems like your central argument to exclude the intercept from that norm. Would be nice to support this hypothesis.

From a testing point of view, it is easier to add a column of ones to X and check for an exact match of coefficients than doing a limit of Ridge with tiny alpha.

Author: I agree. I thought it was intuitive but it's not in retrospect. I'll do that ASAP.

Author: I did the experiments. Let's move this discussion to the main comment area of the PR for the sake of visibility:

https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/pull/25948#issuecomment-1517587995

unpenalized underdetermined cases.

Intercept of the penalized least-squares solution
-------------------------------------------------

Recall the definition of the ridge estimator:

.. math::  \min_{w, w_0} { ||X w + w_0 1_s - y||_2 ^ 2 + \alpha ||w||_2 ^ 2}

Here :math:`1_s` is a vector of size `n_samples` where all entries are 1.
:math:`w_0` is a scalar parameter and is not regularized.

Let's note :math:`\bar{X}` the column vector whose entries the means of the
columns of :math:`X` and :math:`\bar{y}` the mean scalar value of :math:`y`,
:math:`X_c` the centered version of :math:`X`, :math:`y_c` the centered version
of :math:`y` such that:

.. math::  X = X_c + 1_s \bar{X}^{T}  \text{ and } y = y_c + \bar{y} 1_s

Optimizing the original ridge objective with intercept is equivalent to solving
the following ridge problem on the centered dataset with no intercept:

.. math:: \hat{w} = \min_{w} { ||X_c w - y_c||_2 ^ 2 + \alpha ||w||_2 ^ 2}

and subsequently define the intercept as :math:`\hat{w_0} = \bar{y} -
\bar{X}^{T} \hat{w}`.

To see this, let's rewrite the data-fit term of the original ridge problem as

> follows (after rearranging the terms and factorizing by :math:`1_s`):

Reviewer: As @agramfort mentioned, just taking the derivative of $|| X w + w_0 - y||_2^2$ w.r.t. $w_0$ might be an easier derivation.

.. math::  ||X w + w_0 1_s - y||_2^2 = ||X_c w - y_c +  (\bar{X}^{T} w  + w_0  - \bar{y}) 1_s ||_2^2

Let's define the scalar :math:`\bar{r} = \bar{X}^{T} w  + w_0  - \bar{y}`. We
can now expand:

.. math::  ||X w + w_0 1_s - y||_2^2 = ||X_c w - y_c ||_2^2 + ||\bar{r} 1_s ||_2^2 + 2 \bar{r} 1_s^{T} (X_c w - y_c)

> If :math:`n` is the number of samples, we have:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If :math:`n` is the number of data points, we have:
```
to make @lorentzenchr happy :)

Reviewer: This not only makes me happy, but many many statisticians, poll analysts, medical scientists, psychologists, ... 😁

.. math::  ||X w + w_0 1_s - y||_2^2 = ||X_c w - y_c ||_2^2 + \bar{r}^2 n + 2 \bar{r} (1_s^{T} X_c w - 1_s^{T} y_c)

Since :math:`X_c` and :math:`y_c` are the centered versions of X and y, we have
:math:`1_s^{T} X_c = 0` and :math:`1_s^{T} y_c = 0`. Therefore:

.. math::  ||X w + w_0 1_s - y||_2^2 + \alpha ||w||_2^2 = ||X_c w - y_c ||_2^2  + \alpha ||w||_2^2 + \bar{r}^2 n

The first two terms of the right hand side do not depend on :math:`w_0` and are
minimized by :math:`\hat{w}` the solution of the centered ridge without
intercept. The third term is positive and therefore subsequently minimized to
zero by setting :math:`\hat{w_0} = \bar{y} - \bar{X}^{T} \hat{w}`.

Note that the same argument holds for any other penalized linear regression

> estimator (as long as the penalty is such that the solution is unique).

Reviewer 3: this explanation is nice and easy to follow.

When I do this in a class I say that at the optimum the gradient wrt w and w_0 should be zero and when you write the gradient wrt w_0 you get directly `\hat{w_0} = \bar{y} - \bar{X}^{T} \hat{w}`
